in today's episode of Health Theory with
Dr Stephen gundry we talk about why
eating too much meat may actually
shorten your life how these things
called lectins that you're probably
stuffing your face with cause leaky gut
the single healthiest food on the planet
and the seemingly healthy foods that are
actually probably killing you
hey everybody Welcome to health Theory
today's guest is Dr Stephen gundry he's
a heart surgeon medical researcher
former president of the American Heart
Association and New York Times
best-selling author of The deeply
fascinating book plant Paradox he's
performed ten thousand surgeries and
holds the record for longest survival of
a pig to baboon heart transplant and
what I want to know is how to use
somebody who eats a primarily
plant-based diet how did you come to the
conclusion that there are some plants
that are okay and some that are actually
outright bad for us well it actually all
started with a major at Yale University
as an undergrad back in the Dark Ages
where we could actually design our own
major
and we could actually develop a theory
that we wanted to defend and my theory
was that you could take a grade A
manipulate its food supply and its
environment and prove you would arrive
at a human being
over Generations over a long period of
time okay and so I actually defended my
thesis and got an honors and gave my
thesis to my parents and went off to
become a very famous heart surgeon and
cardiologist
and
one of the things I discovered way back
then
was that we evolve in concert with the
plants that we're eating or the animals
that were eating but back then we were
eating leaves and there's actually now
evidence that the thing that makes us
human as opposed to a chimpanzee is
there's a distinct change in the gut
microbiome between when chimps and
gorillas evolved off and we evolved out
and you can actually tell a human being
by their distinctive gut microbiome
instead of a chimpanzee for instance we
share 98 of all of our genetic material
with chimps and gorillas and yet we're
profoundly different and What Makes Us
profoundly different from them is not
our genes it's actually the genes of our
microbiome unfortunately my wife has had
some very real experience with just how
important the microbiome is you're the
only person I've ever heard talk about
that I'd love to or more about that so
if we were going to prove your thesis
out and what would we be doing to the
diet to create that effect in the
microbiome that would Express so such a
radically different species lectins are
plant proteins that are one of the major
defense systems of a plant against being
eaten one of the things that's hard for
us to conceptualize is that plants do
not want to be eaten they actually have
a life and they were actually here first
when insects arrived plants had a
problem because they couldn't run they
couldn't fight they couldn't hide but
they have a huge advantage and that's
their chemists they can turn sunlight
into matter and we haven't figured out
how to do that yet so what they do is
they make proteins that are sometimes
called sticky proteins or lectins that
stick to certain sugar molecules in US
particularly in our gut lining
just by the way if anybody has sinusitis
or runny noses when they eat certain
foods you are actually producing sugar
molecules in your mucus to trap lectins
and I have so many people who had
chronic sinusitis including myself when
we finally got lectins out of our diet
they completely went away
so lectins bind to sugar molecules
lectins cause the wall of our gut to
actually separate and people have heard
the term leaky gut
I used to if you'd asked me 15 years ago
if I thought leaky gut was was a problem
I would have said it was pseudoscience
now with the advances in understanding
how the microbiome works and in
understanding how lectins work
I think everyone who has a disease has a
leaky gut now I'm pretty dumb
Hippocrates said this 2500 years ago
that all disease begins in the gut so
one of the things we know about research
is research is research look again
because somebody already knew this and
Hippocrates knew it 2500 years ago it's
really interesting and I I have heard
that quote so many times and it's one
that I just accept and go oh wow what a
great Insight what do you think led him
to that at even now people have a hard
time conceptualizing the microbiome
because it's invisible so how did he
come to that conclusion he had this
interesting theory he believed that we
all any creature has what he called the
translation is Green Life Force energy
that actually wants perfect health for
that creature and that it's a driving
force unfortunately he believed as I do
that there were external forces that
were preventing that expression of Green
Life Force energy so he thought the
purpose of a physician was to identify
those external forces that were keeping
the Green Life Force energy from
expressing itself and remove them or
teach the patient to remove them and
then the patient would heal him or
herself because the Green Life Force
energy would take over now that sounds
kind of new age and touchy-feely but he
was absolutely right and one of the
things that I guess I and other people
have discovered is that one of those
external contributing factors are
lectins and if you remove move certain
lectins things you'll start to heal
yourself let me give you another example
if we're out on the ocean in a boat and
the boat Springs a leak in the bottom of
the boat and water is rushing in
we have two options the one option is we
grab a bucket and we start bailing the
bigger the hole is like the old
commercial we're going to need a bigger
bucket and I think that most systems for
healing the gut are just giving people
buckets to bail whatever it is it's a
lot easier to plug the dumb hole and
then you don't need buckets and so if
lectins are one of the major ways that
we get leaky gut then if we get lectins
out of our diet that's how we plug the
holes unfortunately for us the lining of
the gut is only one cell thick and so
imagine one cell thickness keeping
everything you eat or everything living
in you like bacteria separated from you
and they're all held together locked arm
and arm with tight junctions so what Dr
Fasano showed with gluten which is a
lectin is that gluten makes its trouble
by causing leaky gut so once those
spaces are open not only do lectins get
through which are foreign proteins
they're splinters but also pieces of
bacteria called or living bacteria also
get through the wall
now on the other side of the wall
is your border patrol your immune system
and 65 percent of all the white cells in
our body are up against this wall
why are they there because that's where
the problem is going to happen if it's
going to happen
so when these foreign proteins get
across the wall the immune system
basically sounds the alarm sounds the
Airaid Sirens we go to threat level five
we scramble the fighter jets and we
actually go to war status
and as I talk about in the book that war
status has manifested in multiple ways
whether it's brain fog whether it's
arthritis whether it's depression or
anxiety whether it's coronary artery
disease which is how I got interested in
it in the first place and all of these
things come right back to what
Hippocrates said 2500 years ago that if
you want to cure the disease head to the
gut and I see this for instance I had so
many allergies as a young adult and in
college that I had to get all allergy
shots and you know oh you're allergic to
things well my allergies were just
because my immune system was just on
hyper overload I don't have any
allergies anymore I didn't outgrow my
allergies
through the last 17 years I've told my
immune system to chill out there's
nothing to be interested in here because
there's nothing coming across the border
that's super interesting probably about
three months ago I started getting
really itchy and then just like in like
my chest would itch like crazy my back
would it like crazy I'm like what is
going on because I'm really religious on
my diet I don't cheat on my diet but a
couple times a year like I'm really
hardcore about it and then it started
with like a little spot on my neck and
then it was like I had to wear like long
sleeve everything I was just one big
rash it was it was insane and I've never
had anything like that in my life
and so I was like this I know this is
something I'm eating just like in my gut
I can feel that that's true but I
haven't changed my diet I was like what
could this be and before I give you the
punchline of what I think it is
what when you hear stuff like that where
do you go
well you're the best way to think about
your skin is your the lining of your gut
is actually your skin turned inside out
that's fascinating and so you have from
your mouth all the way down to your anus
a tube that's got the surface area of a
tennis court and everything that you
swallow is actually outside of you
as it's moving through the inside skin
has to do the same functions as the
outside skin and that is keep things
away from us but it's got a fatal flaw
it not only has to keep things out but
it has to let things in like the
proteins and the fats and the sugars
that we eat so that's where the Mischief
can happen but when I see someone with
an external skin problem it's always a
reflection of what's actually happening
in the gut what is that process what
does it look like how can people that
are watching this now if they're
struggling from something how do they
begin that process of repair
so you know I think the first thing you
do is get major lectin containing foods
out of your diet you won't like me for a
couple weeks but most people even within
a couple weeks begin to notice a
difference now what are those they're
foods that we actually evolutionary were
not designed to eat
beans are so lethal raw that there's
very good published studies in humans
that they can cause massive bloody
diarrhea and there's some pretty good
studies in monkeys rhesus monkeys and
red velvet monkeys that they can
actually cause heart disease and even
kidney damage from the lectin content
what's fascinating from a human
evolution standpoint is that humans up
until the dawn of Agriculture were
actually very tall creatures most humans
were about six feet tall and our brain
size was about 15 percent bigger than it
is today
and when if you look chronologically by
8 000 years 2000 years into grain and
bean eating we actually shrunk about a
foot and our brain size has never
recovered from 10 000 years ago so these
are
anti-nutrients grains and beans that's
number one
number two two thousand years ago
northern European cows suffered a
genetic mutation a spontaneous mutation
where they stopped making the normal
protein and milk casein A2 and began
making casein A1
now casein A1 has olectin-like protein
that is converted into a compound called
beta caseiomorphine which can cause a
direct immunologic attack on the beta
cell of the pancreas the insulin
producing cell in the pancreas and
there's some pretty good evidence and
it's accumulating every every year that
one of the causes of type 1 diabetes or
juvenile diabetes is casein A1 milk and
it actually correlates very well
in countries that have casein A1 cows
they have much higher incidence of type
1 diabetes than countries that have
casein A2 cows
cheeses for instance are safe from
France Italy and Switzerland sheep goats
and water buffalo are all caseinate too
and what is it about that that's so
problematic it actually makes a it's a
lectin-like compound that stimulates an
immune response so just as I would get
from the beans or whatever I'm mixing
you'll get the same thing okay so it's a
it's a very new addition to our diet now
the newest addition to our diet
is some of our most precious foods are
American North American or South
American foods for instance in the
nightshade family potatoes eggplant
peppers tomatoes and Goji berries so the
the nightshades the peel and the and the
seeds have the lectins and Native
American Indians in the southwest always
peel and de-seed their peppers they Char
their peppers they de-seed them and then
they either grind it into chili or eat
them that way but they always do that
the
Italians always peel and de-seed their
Tomatoes before they make sauce and is
this like a cultural intuition kind of
thing where they what do I what I like
to do is I go around the world studying
cultures and figuring out why did they
do this how did they detoxify lectins
for instance rice was invented 8 000
years ago four billion people use rice
as their staple yet four billion people
take the hall off of rice and eat it
white and surely there can't be four
billion dumb people who don't know any
better that white rice is bad for them
and brown rice is good for them in fact
they've been taking the hall off of rice
for 8 000 years
same way believe it or not up until
William William and Harvey Kellogg in
the early 1900s did the idea that whole
grains were good for us and if you look
back 50 years
and when the whole grain goodness really
caught on you'll notice that a lot of
our current health issues including this
epidemic of autoimmune disease didn't
occur this epidemic of dementia didn't
occur and so whole grains are one of
those wonderful myths that got
perpetrated by a few individuals the
other individual that perpetrated this
English surgeon by the name of Dr
Burkett
and Dr Burkett did some missionary work
in Africa in the middle of the sen of
the last century and he is a colon
surgeon a guy who would operate on colon
Cancers and he went down there to do
some work and nobody had colon cancer he
actually went around and watched and
looked at the bowel movements of these
Africans who were eating huge amounts of
tubers things like yams for instance or
celerac root or jicama and their bowel
movements were huge and he goes wow you
know look at all they're eating all this
fibrous stuff and it must be that the
fiber in their diet is keeping them from
having colon cancer
so he came back to England and he
espoused the fiber theory of preventing
cancer
now the problem is in England they
didn't have a lot of these sorts of
tuberous foods but they had tons of
what's called insoluble fiber in the
form of wheat and rye and barley and
even oats so he didn't know the
difference between insoluble fiber and
soluble fiber and so he said we should
all be eating fiber and so that's
actually where that whole idea that the
hall was actually good for you now the
ironic thing is he actually died of
colon cancer
that is very ironic very ironic there's
a saying among surgeons that we always
die from the disease we treat so
well then so that there's so many
interesting points in there talk to me
about how animal Meats end up because
you don't eat hardly any
um how how does lectin find its way into
animal meat we raise animals with
antibiotics and this was discovered by
by accident years ago when they were
thinking that antibiotics might be
needed for crowded conditions of you
know Stockyard animals but the
researcher found out that by giving
antibiotics to these animals they grew
faster and got fatter much quicker than
the animals who didn't get the
antibiotics so it was approved by the
Department of Agriculture and the FDA to
give antibiotics to animals for the
purpose of growth
those what we didn't know is that those
residual antibiotics are incorporated
into the meat the beef the chicken the
pork you name it and so we actually
every time we ingest Factory raised
meats or even farm-raised fish ingest
micro doses of antibiotics
micro doses of antibiotics are
incredibly effective at killing off your
microbiome
so in the last 40 years we've had this
you know
incredible you know the the worst storm
that could possibly happen for our
microbiome and for our leaky gut
so then our lectins their elect and like
substances in the meat but is there
actually lectin itself great question
there was just paper published from Ohio
State a few weeks ago that shows that
lectins and soybeans can be found in the
meat of animals that you feed them to
now I used to think that this was kind
of fanciful in the alternative medicine
world you know you are what you eat but
you are with the thing you're eating ate
and as I started seeing more and more
autoimmune patients
we had case reports
of particularly there's a woman
psychologist in La that I talk about in
the book who had horrible lupus was on
Two drugs and we got her off of all her
drugs by following this program
and her her lupus cleared she had rashes
and she she came back to see me and she
said you know everything's great but
I've got this eczema this little rash on
my upper eyelids and so we're going
through the list I said well something's
getting into you and we get to
pasture-raised chicken and I said now
you're you're eating past your raised
chicken cheese oh yeah I eat organic
free-range chicken all the time it's my
go-to food I said
free-range chicken and she said yeah
yeah you know organic free range they
said well the federal government in 2007
passed a law that says you can keep
100 000 chickens in a warehouse feed
them organic corn and soybeans and not
let them out of the warehouse except
open a door for five minutes every 24
hours and the chicken has the potential
to go outside and that is the current
government definition of organic
free-range chicken wow so she was eating
the lectins of soybeans and corn in the
chicken that she was eating I trained in
London England for children's heart
surgery and my kids were four and six
years old
and they missed Kentucky Fried Chicken
terribly and a Kentucky Fried Chicken
opened in London now in those days there
was so much fish available in England
that the chickens were fed ground up
fish meal and the the chicken breasts
were actually translucent like fish
and uh so you know we go to Kentucky
Fried Chicken they both grab a drumstick
and they bite it under the drumstick and
my four-year-old goes oh oh you tricked
us this is fish ooh this isn't chicken
and I'm going oh no no no no look you
know drumstick you know Colonel Sanders
that's chicken no it's fish well she was
right it wasn't a chicken it was
a chicken with feathers that was
actually a fish
so we have to realize that our chickens
are no longer chickens they're an ear of
corn with feathers Americans are 70
percent carbon atoms from corn a
substance that we were never exposed to
until 500 years ago Europeans are five
percent corn in fact France in 1900
banned corn as unfit for human
consumption wow
so what I want people to do is is eat
and party like it's 9
999 years ago before we started all this
mess
and when we do that with people and
teach them how to do it
it's amazing what happens to them well
let's talk about that because if I had
only heard some headlines about you I
would have thought oh red meat I'll get
after it because I eat a ton of red meat
and think I'm doing healthy things so
you don't need a lot of meat why not so
we found that there was a molecule a
sugar molecule
on the wall of pig blood vessels that's
totally different from the sugar
molecule that's in ours but it differs
by only one actually atom and it's new
it's called nu5 GC in pigs cows and
lambs and we carry what's called new 5ac
and I have nothing against red meat but
if you look statistically the red meat
eaters do have significantly more
coronary heart disease and significantly
more cancer now why cancer well it turns
out that cancers tumors in humans use
new 5 GC to Shield themselves from
detection by the immune system the
problem is we don't manufacture new 5gc
nor can a cancer cell which means they
acquired it from external sources namely
beef laminate pork now fish doesn't
carry it they have the same molecule
that we do and chicken have the same
molecule that we do
so I urge people if they're going to eat
animal protein and I I do to use wild
shellfish or wild fish as their main
source of animal protein do I eat meat
yeah I mean do I eat beef I do but I get
grass fed and grass-finished beef and I
use it as As a treat not as a Mainstay
of my diet
and then what's your take on eggs
the yolk of the egg may be the most
beneficial food that has ever been
invented and as long as the chickens are
fed what they're designed to eat well I
actually ask people to mainly throw the
whites away so we'll do a four egg
omelet but four of them are yolks and
just use one white and what is it in the
whites or about the whites that make
them problematic okay it's animal
protein and let's look at another reason
not to eat animal protein sadly
so animal protein
there we there's a sensor in all of our
cells called mtor and it senses energy
availability in its senses sugar
availability but it senses certain amino
acid availability so if you avoid or
lessen your amount of animal protein
your mtor will fall now we have no way
of measuring clinically mtor but we can
use a surrogate for that which is
insulin-like growth factor igf-1
and in my super old people and I study a
lot of super olds 95 and above
um they all have extremely low
insulin-like growth factors and why why
is that a number you want to get down
because super old people always run low
insulin-like growth factors they always
do and uh in my upcoming book the
longevity Paradox if you look at
societies of the blue zones the longest
living people on earth
the common factor that they all have in
their diet they have very diverse diets
there's no Universal diet that these
people follow and I was a professor at
one of the blue zones Loma Linda for
most of my life
the thing that separates or unites all
of those various diets is they eat very
little animal protein
and one of the things we notice about
super old people is they run low body
temperatures they're running 96 degrees
whereas you and I are running 98.6 and
they become incredibly efficient
creatures my mentor Dr Morrow always
said that you only have so many
heartbeats and when you use those up
that's the end and he's actually right
in a lot of ways but the corollary to
that is let's suppose Your Design is
that you only get so many calories in
your lifetime
and you can use them quickly or you can
spread them out and that's why that's
why fasting uh is so useful and
intermittent fasting is so useful
because it's actually an easy way
just to reduce your calorie intake and
it's you know once you learn how to do
it it's it's an easy way to make this
system work how do you pull it off so
I'm a huge proponent of intermittent
fasting and fasting in general how do
you do how do you make it an easy
process
so I started uh 11 years ago at January
1st to June 1st
but during the week I would eat all my
calories in a two hour window from six
to eight o'clock at night so the 22 out
of the 24 hours every day five days a
week I was fasting 22 hours now why six
to eight o'clock a night because that's
when my wife and I were at home and
um now this is as you know for a
professional driver on a closed course
what most people who try to do this
don't realize about 80 percent of us in
America
are insulin resistant we have much too
much insulin production
and I won't bore you or the listeners
but most people can't do prolonged
fasting for even more than a few hours
because they can't access the fat that
they've stored
and they crash and it's often called the
Atkins flu or the low carb flu where
they have to be able to transition over
to using ketones as a fuel now you can
get there fairly quickly and we have
tips in the book on how to do that you
actually have to use exogenous ketones
for a while things like MCT oil things
like coconut oil even red palm oil
there's a little bit of exogenous
ketones in butter it's called butyric
acid yeah it's um intermittent fasting
is really really powerful for
alleviating brain fog for changing your
relationship to hunger is how I always
think of it as just fundamentally
different and then getting your
Machinery used to actually accessing
your body fat and all that we're
designed to use up fat we just have to
you know use the tricks to get to that
fat for most people who are overweight
or obese what's so frustrating for them
is they try things like intermittent
fasting and they're pretty miserable
they get headaches and they're very
hungry their brain is going hey you know
what what's the deal you've cut me off
it's water water everywhere and not a
drop to drink and we see so many
overweight and obese people and I was 70
pounds overweight I was obese running 30
miles a week and going to the gym one
hour a day and going why how come I'm
such a fekka I couldn't get to my fat
stores because I had an elevated insulin
level when I first you know got my
insulin I was wow
um
what's that now I have a very low
insulin now that stuff is fascinating in
terms of the complexities of really
breaking through and figuring out for
you what do you have to do to lose fat
keep it off and yeah it's a very complex
thing and to that end not necessarily my
question is not really about fat loss
but
um given what we've been talking about
lectins and autoimmune and all of those
joints aches pains all the things that
come along with it psoriasis all of that
what should people be eating so we we've
got a rough sense of what we should be
avoiding but what should we be actively
pursuing okay so the only purpose of
food is to get olive oil into your mouth
um there are three long-lived Societies
in the blue zones that use a liter of
olive oil per week that's about 12 to 14
tablespoons a day can I use it to saute
you can use it to saute believe it or
not there's a wonderful paper from the
NIH showing that olive oil does not
break down into harmful compounds that's
amazing but bring olive oil to the table
so if you're going to have a steak
please pour it on your meat as they do
in Italy they always bring a bottle of
olive oil so you can have steak
Florentina and just drench it with olive
oil the steak is there to get olive oil
into your mouth broccoli is there to get
olive oil into your mouth a salad is
there to get olive oil into your mouth
so
there are wonderful cruciferous
vegetables you can have all the bok choy
broccoli cauliflower have cauliflower
pizzas there's a great recipe in my
cookbook for cauliflower pizza uh can I
have Japanese sweet potatoes yes please
oh they're so good yeah but the purpose
of the sweet potato is to get olive oil
into your mouth yes which works for me
just fine if I can saute or use an air
fryer yeah have you done yes everything
oh my God they're like french fries they
sure are so yeah so those are great for
you things like Yucca or Yucca make
phenomenal french fries but parboil them
first and then put them in the airfryer
also any tuber so like celerac root is
fantastic jicama so get some guacamole
believe it or not true guacamole does
not have tomatoes in it that's an
American whatever
and get yourself some hika mistakes
Trader Joe's has them lots of plain old
grocery stores have them use that as
your dipping chip other thing I like
people to get is
vegetables in The Chicory family uh the
more chicory you can get in your life
Radicchio the kind of Italian red
lettuce is pure inulin and your gut bugs
will love a little bit for it love it
all right before I ask my last question
where can these guys find you online so
go to gundrymd.com you can sign up for
my daily newsletter there's also a
gundry MD YouTube channel where every
day I'm giving crazy hints and recipes
to live this lifestyle it's not a diet
it's a lifestyle for sure all right I
think I know the answer to this but
what's the one big change that people
can make in their life that would have
the biggest impact on their health
the biggest change that people can make
is just get these foods that you are not
designed to eat out of your life for a
while and Watch What Happens the grains
and the beans and the nightshades and
stop eating peanuts and cashews they're
beans they're not nuts and I can't tell
you the number of people who have gut
issues or even heart disease issues that
peanuts and cashews were one of the big
Mischief Makers that's interesting
awesome Dr gundry thank you so much
thanks for having me the incredible
all right guys if you want to join me in
this one I am going to be trying out
this diet I am so interested I've never
ever considered really even for a second
going low meat low animal uh proteins so
but reading his book and going into the
research I'm intrigued there's something
about the breakdown that he gives about
lectin and the way that it impacts your
body and the way that it impacts the
lining in the gut it just there was it
all made so much sense to me and then
looking at it from an evolutionary
standpoint again it just made a lot of
sense so I'm going to be trying this and
experimenting so uh join me if you will
I think that he is one of the most
interesting voices in the space talking
about it in a way that doesn't just
become psychotic Dogma it's really just
looking at what actually happened we
didn't get a talk about his time as a
surgeon which I am sorry for uh it's
really interesting remember Ten Thousand
operations that he did and he has seen a
lot of Hearts opened up looked inside of
arteries so that level of understanding
of what it's at actually doing to your
body I think is so important and I
certainly consider that when I think
about taking somebody's advice or not
but I believe see it for yourself see if
it works for you or not because I have
been itchy this will be a great
experiment and I will see whether it
works or not so I'm really excited I
hope you guys will join me Andy has
another thing he has so many tips go
check out his website I'm telling you
right now it's fantastic and one of the
things he says to try is you guys know I
drink diet coke and so I'm actually
going to try cutting that out by
drinking soda water so just a nice
sparkling mineral water
San Pellegrino is his uh recommendation
it's the best high and sulfur content so
give that a shot and you pour one to two
tablespoons of balsamic vinegar and I
tried it today it's actually pretty good
I was shocked there's no Diet Coke I'm
not gonna lie but if it means that I
live forever then I'm all for it so
hopefully you guys will give this stuff
a try and hopefully you will dive much
deeper into his world there's something
about his voice and the way that he's
coming at this that I I was really
intrigued by so I look forward to
learning more all right if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
awesome thank you again so much thank
you guys so much for watching and being
a part of this community if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe you're
going to get weekly videos on building a
growth mindset cultivating grit and
unlocking your full potential